What does the XML language represent? 
	Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language that defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format which is both human-readable and machine-readable. It is defined by the W3C's XML 1.0 Specification[2] and by several other related specifications,[3] all of which are free open standards.[4]

	The design goals of XML emphasize simplicity, generality and usability across the Internet.[5] It is a textual data format with strong support via Unicode for different human languages. Although the design of XML focuses on documents, it is widely used for the representation of arbitrary data structures[6] such as those used in web services.

	Several schema systems exist to aid in the definition of XML-based languages, while many application programming interfaces (APIs) have been developed to aid the processing of XML data.
What is it used for?
	As of 2009, hundreds of document formats using XML syntax have been developed,[7] including RSS, Atom, SOAP, and XHTML. XML-based formats have become the default for many office-productivity tools, including Microsoft Office (Office Open XML), OpenOffice.org and LibreOffice (OpenDocument), and Apple's iWork. XML has also been employed as the base language for communication protocols, such as XMPP. Applications for the Microsoft .NET Framework use XML files for configuration. Apple has an implementation of a registry based on XML.[8]

	XML has come into common use for the interchange of data over the Internet. IETF RFC 7303 gives rules for the construction of Internet Media Types for use when sending XML. It also defines the media types application/xml and text/xml, which say only that the data is in XML, and nothing about its semantics. The use of text/xml has been criticized as a potential source of encoding problems and it has been suggested that it should be deprecated.[9]

	RFC 7303 also recommends that XML-based languages be given media types ending in +xml; for example image/svg+xml for SVG.

	Further guidelines for the use of XML in a networked context may be found in RFC 3470, also known as IETF BCP 70, a document covering many aspects of designing and deploying an XML-based language.